In this lecture, you'll learn how to configure VTP, the VLAN Trunking Protocol, with a lab demo.
So, I've got the usual lab topology here.
I've got my three switches, SW1 through to SW3.
Right now, I've configured trunks between each of the switches, but that's all of the configuration
that I've done.
I haven't created any VLANs anywhere and I haven't created any access ports.
So, let's verify that.
So I'll go on to SW1,
and if I do a 'show run' in here and go down to the configuration for that interface GigabitEthernet0/1,
you can see that I've configured it as a trunk port,
and the only VLAN that is configured right now is VLAN 199 for the Native VLAN.
So if I do a 'show vlan brief', you can see that the Sales and the Eng VLANs have not been created yet.
So I created a Native VLAN, so that I could do my trunk configuration.
So that's how it's configured on SW1,
it's the same one SW2 and SW3.
And if I do a 'show vtp status' on here, I haven't changed this,
so this is going to be the default where the VLAN domain name is currently null,
there isn't one, and the VTP mode is server.
That's the same on all of the switches.
What I want to do in this lab, if I have a look at the topology again,
I'm going to configure SW1 as a VTP server, SW2 will be VTP transparent, and SW3
will be VTP client.
So I'll configure the VLANs on this server,
the VTP transparent SW2 should pass that information on to the client and the VLAN should show
up there.
I'm also going to need to configure the VLANs on SW2 because it's in transparent mode.
So let's go from right to left,
I'll configure the VTP client first. So I'll go on to SW3,
I just do a 'show vlan brief' on here, so you can see there's no VLANs there yet, and a 'show vtp status'
and it's the default of no domain name and it is currently a server. So on here,
I will say 'vtp domain',
let's make it 'Flackbox', and I need to go to global configuration before I can do that.
So 'vtp domain Flackbox',
and 'vtp mode client'. So I get a confirmation message that it's changed it to Flackbox and it's changed
it to client mode. I'll do I do 'show vtp status' and I should see that is changed,
so there is the domain name and it's client mode.
So, that is SW3 configured.
Next, I will do SW2. So on SW2,
I don't want it to participate in the VTP domain. If I do a 'show vtp status',
it's also at the default settings.
Actually, what's happened here on SW2 is that it has picked up the domain name from the other
switch, which is Flackbox, and it's still a server which is the default.
So I'll go to global configuration here, and I will say 'vtp mode transparent'.
So it's going to be independent for its VLAN configuration now, and a 'do show vtp status' just to verify
that it did
take that,
and yes, it is now transparent.
The last one to do is SW1 and on SW1, let's do a 'show vtp status' again,
and I see that it's picked up the domain name as well, at Flack box.
So I'll go to global config and if I do a 'vtp domain Flackbox' in here,
it's going to tell me that the domain name was already set to that, and I'll say 'vtp mode server' and it's
going to tell me it was already a server.
Okay, so that is VTP set up.
All I need to do now is actually configure my VLANs. So again, I'll do a 'do show vlan brief',
I don't have any VLANs configured yet apart from the Native VLAN for my trunks. So on the server,
I'll say 'vlan 10', 'name Eng', and 'vlan 20', 'name Sales',
and if I now look in the VLAN database here with a 'show vlan brief', I can see that those VLANs have
been created. If I go over onto SW3 now, it didn't have any VLANs previously.
I just scrolled up there,
you can see that the Eng and the Sales VLANs weren't there before.
But if I do a 'show vlan brief' now, I can see that it has learned about the Eng and the Sales VLANs
from the server.
If I go onto SW2, and I do a 'show vlan brief' on here, the VLANs aren't showing up on there,
the new ones, because it's transparent.
It doesn't synchronize its database.
Okay, next thing to do is to test everything is working.
So, I will configure the switchports. To save me typing this in,
I've put it into a text file, so let me bring that up.
So on SW1,
interfaces fastEthernet0/1 and fastEthernet0/2 are in the Eng VLAN 10 and port fastEthernet0/3 is in the Sales VLAN. So let
me copy this and then paste it in on SW1,
and I've also got a config ready for SW3, where interfaces fastEthernet0/1 and fastEthernet0/2 are int the Sales VLAN,
and fastEthernet0/3 is in the Eng VLAN.
So I'll copy that and paste that into SW3,
paste that in. Let's have a look at the topology diagram,
so there you see the Eng PCs that I've configured their access ports now on SW1, and on SW3
as well for ENG3,
and I've also configured my access ports for Sales as well.
So now, if I go onto the ENG1 PC, and I'll try to ping 10.10.10.12, which is ENG3,
which is on the other far end switch.
I'm going to try this. It's going to fail,
and the reason for that is if I go back onto the switches again, you'll see on SW3
if I do a 'show vlan brief', I've got the Eng and the Sales VLANs and I've also put my clients into
the correct access VLAN, so that was on SW3, and the same thing on SW1 'show vlan brief',
it knows about the VLANs, and the clients are put into the correct VLAN.
The problem is if I have a look at SW2, if I can find it in here, when I do a 'show vlan brief' in
here, it doesn't know about the Sales and the Eng VLANs because this is VTP transparent.
So looking at the topology diagram again, it comes in from SW1
to SW2, tagged with a Dot1Q tag of the Eng VLAN, but SW2 doesn't know about
the VLAN.
So that's why the traffic is failing right now.
So I need to go on to SW2 and in global configuration, because it's transparent,
I need to add my VLANs here as well.
So I'll say 'vlan 10', 'name Eng', and 'vlan 20', 'name Sales'.
If I now go back onto my Engineering PC, try the ping again,
it will probably fail for a little while.
I need to give this a second to come up.
So let's just watch the request time out,
and it might take a few pings, I might even have to do the ping again before it's going to actually
come up and allow the traffic through.
Okay, there we go.
So the last one succeeded,
and if I do the ping again, I'll see they're all going to work now.
So I've now got end-to-end connectivity between my Eng PCs,
let's check that Sales is working as well.
This should also be good.
So I'm on SALES1,
I will ping SALES3. So SALES1
is on SW3, SALES3 is on SW1 on the other side,
it's at 10.10.20.12,
and this works just fine too.
So I've got end-to-end connectivity between my PCs in the same VLANs,
but if I go on a Sales PC and I try to ping an Engineering PC, this is going to fail because
it's in a different IP subnet,
and if you have a look at our topology diagram, I don't have a router yet. So we need to configure
inter-VLAN on routing to allow that to work,
that's what we're going to do in the next lecture.